they don't use the damn drug and the
drug is so powerful and if you use it
according to press pulse Concepts you'll
get really good results for the majority
of people nobody is targeting glucose
and glutamine simultaneously while
placing the patient in nutritional
[Music]
[Applause]
ketosis hello everyone this is Felix
your friendly neighborhood kidney Aker
coming back again for episode number 14
it is I have an amazing interview for
you it might be one of the most
important interviews that you hear this
year if you are concerned with
PKD this interview is with Professor
Thomas sefre Professor seed is the main
voice out there for the metabolic theory
of cancer and as you will notice in our
conversation there is a lot of
similarities between the metabolic
theory of cancer and the pathogenesis of
PKD in fact Professor seed's work was
what initially tipped me off towards the
warber effect and the dependence of
cystic tissue on glucose now a couple
years after I stumbled upon Professor SE
Freed's work he actually added a new
facet to this metabolic theory of cancer
which is that cancer cells don't just
need glucose to ferment but they can
also use something else to make their
energy and it is glutamine in this
discussion with Professor sea freed I
will draw the parallels between Cancer
and PKD and you will hear that in PKD we
actually have studies showing the same
mechanism this means that inhibiting
glucose with a ketogenic diet can be
enough for some people but for some
other people it might not be enough and
we might have to employ other strategies
that focus on glutamine as another
nutrient that we need to suppress in
order to reduce cyst growth over the
long term I will do another recap
episode to give you the gist of
everything so before we go into too much
detail on this let's go over to the man
himself explaining all these Concepts
and how they relate to PKD Professor
Thomas CED welcome Professor CED from
Boston College well thank you Felix yes
so the people in the PKD field they're
sort of familiar with ketogenic diets
and you're basically the pioneer of
bringing this to the Forefront of uh of
discussions especially in the field of
cancer and most people that are watching
this probably aren't super familiar with
um even mitochondria which is uh your
main focus so could you maybe give us a
short overview of mitochondria and why
they are super important for our cells
yes they are the controllers of our cell
metabolism they are the controllers of
the differentiated State the quiescent
state they are the controllers of the
cell cycle so um the field of biology
has placed enormous study of the nucleus
the biology of the nucleus containing
the DNA
material uh that uh everyone is excited
about but it turns out in the long run
it's the mitochondria that control what
the nucleus does it's just unbelievable
um you have to
realize um you can have a lot of damage
to the nucleus and the cell can still be
there and function to some uh extent the
mitochondria has its own genome um it's
circular and it's
multiple and there are 13 genes in the
mitochondrial genome that control the
kingdom uh the control the the life of
the cell anything would happen to any
one of those 13 genes the cell up and
dies very quickly so the mitochondria
control the life and death of the cell
um in all in all aspects and I have
always viewed the nucleus as a responder
to mitochondrial uh function so uh
mitochondria control control the uh
epigenetics of the nucleus so um what
goes on in the physiology of that cell
ultimately revolves around what the
mitochondria do so and the mitochondria
allow the cell to respond in different
ways to changes in the environment so uh
genes turn on and turn off largely in
response to uh something happening in
the physiology the physiological state
of the cell which is controlled by the
mitochondria so this is the control
switch because the aptic signaling the
programmed cell death uh is controlled
by the mitochondria so the life and
death of the cell is controlled by that
organel uh which which merged uh
billions of years ago uh to allow
metazone because let's be honest before
mitochondria which were a cyano cyano
kind of bacteria before mitochondria
merged with another cell there was no
metazone there was no multicellular
organisms so the reason why you and I
and others are here today all most
living organisms is the result of that
Fusion hyp uh process um that is the
origin of multicellular life controlled
by that by that organism which has now
taken residence in the majority of cells
so and it controls um uh our our life
our extension our existence on the
planet how long we can live is depending
on is dependent on how long we can keep
mitochondria healthy and functional
because what happens is that if you die
of old age you know you're alive like
Queen Elizabeth she she's shaking in the
hand of the the new uh the new prime
minister one day with a big smile and
two days later she's dead so what
happens is you get a systemic shutdown
of mitochondrial function and you die um
unless you have all these diseases that
would uh you know damage mitochondria
before uh before their energy would run
out and you die from those things but
yeah I look at the mitochondria as the
the controller of the kingdom of the
cell and um you must respect the organel
and if it gets if it gets corrupted in
any way uh it can uh uh lead to all
kinds of of you know pathological
conditions so uh yes so this organal is
very important and we have not yet found
any tumor cell anywhere that has a
normal number structure and function of
mitochondria consequently the cell is
fermenting uh all all cancer cells are
fermenters which means energy without
oxygen because the mitochondria lost
control and then the cells fall back on
these ancient Pathways uh metabolic
pathways before mitochondria fused
before the fusion hybridization happened
and we had cells that had no
mitochondria and they were all dependent
on fermentation and they would have
disregulated growth regulation of growth
only came after the fusion of the
cyanobacteria with the other kind of
cell uh and life complicate complex life
began to develop at that time these are
the laws of nature these are what leads
to where we are today in most uh life
form forms using uh sunlight as energy
which is just about most things living
on the planet today that's an
interesting way to put it that
mitochondria would you say that they're
sort of the the breaks on the
uncontrolled
growth oh absolutely they they control
the cell cycle through the proton uh
gradient calcium signaling controls the
cyclin and the cyclines are the are the
proteins that allow the cell to go
through uh this cell cycle so uh that's
all regulated by the mitochondria so if
the mitochondria lose their control the
cell falls back on a default state which
is proliferation uncontrolled and the
fuel to do that is fermentation all one
the problem with medicine and people
today is they don't understand
evolutionary biology once you understand
evolutionary biology all this stuff
makes perfect sense there should be no
controversy you know U but you when you
when you when you don't understand
evolutionary biology and have no clue
then everything seems to be so
mysterious and un very complicated and
difficult to understand I understand all
this stuff I mean because I understand
evolutionary biology and I can make I
can link the dots you link the dots you
can understand the yeah yeah the way the
way you put it makes a lot of sense I
think um not really makes sense it's
supported by scientific data yeah yeah
and you're saying if the mitochondria
are sort of the breaks on proliferation
then um yeah that that brings me to to
the big parallel which we want to draw
today which is the one between Cancer
and PKD which has been uh drawn in in
some other papers already and I want to
talk to you about this specifically
because um there are some images of uh
PKD mitochondria and if you look at the
electrom microscope imagery in the
papers that have them and compare them
to to your papers and compare how the
mitochondria look they're basically
indistinguishable so um do do you do you
think it's a possibility or do you know
if
basically all proliferative diseases
including PKD but also other prolifer
diseases could be um of this
origin well disregulated prolifer that's
what cancer is it's it's cell division
out of control disregulated cell growth
but you know it's very interesting we
draw comparisons as warberg had done and
Dean Burke and myself to the liver liver
regeneration they th uh Li regenerating
liver cells can grow uh faster than any
any liver cancer and they're regulated
that they they know exactly when to stop
uh because the they're they're using
respiratory energy they're not using
fermentation energy so uh it's a very
interesting difference because here you
have cells that are growing very rapidly
under control of the mitochondria uh but
the hepatoma of the same cells is cell
division out of control because the
mitochondria and the hepatoma is damaged
and they're not they're damaged or I
should say inefficient in their ability
to produce energy through oxida
phosphorilation and therefore those
cells are in their default state which
is proliferation whereas in the
regenerating liver normal regenerating
they're under the control of energy
Metabolism from the mitochondria
controlling the cell cycle how those
liver cells know when to stop uh is
quite intriguing and um uh be but it is
obviously the mitochondria because when
it's damaged the liver cells no longer
know when to stop yeah so again this
these are very exciting areas of
research yeah it is super exciting and
and it's very exciting to to to the
audience on this podcast because we uh
are afflicted by this proliferation or
uncontrolled proliferation in polycystic
kidney disease and in our case uh and
this is also for the viewers the pkd1
and pkd2 mutations they uh code for the
polyc one and polyc 2 proteins which um
are help in the regulation of
intracellular calcium which um is is
very tightly intertwined with with
oxygen metabolism right so yeah um and
you work a lot with uh or or you talk
about uh the braa one for example in
cancer and uh I was wondering if you
could sort of draw some parallels
between those two and and how um a
genetic mutation which doesn't in itself
affect the mitochondria can then over
time lead to mitochondrial dysfunction
like this yeah well that's what we did
now I have to be honest with you I
haven't done a deep dive on polycystic
kidney disease uh but from what you've
already said it seems like there might
be uh a strong linkage with
mitochondrial dysfunction um but bracka
one uh you know Leaf manyi which is a
p-53 germline mutation um none of these
uh so-called germline mutations are 100%
penetrant uh meaning that there are
people that have the mutations that
never develop the the pathology of
cancer um and and so therefore we look
at all the mutations as secondary risk
factors rather than primary risk factor
and I I give the comparison what is a
primary um what is a what is a mutation
that is 100% associated with pathology
and I can use the mutation Huntington's
disease uh which is a mutation in the
protein Huntington anyone that would
inherit that mutation 100% of the
patients develop the neurological
disease Huntington's disease tasac
disease cystic fibrosis these kinds of
of of mutations are the Prime uh Prime
cause of the pathology but if the if the
mutation is not 100% penetrant like all
of the major cancer U known germline
mutations then they cannot be considered
Prime causes they can be considered
secondary causes or risk factors and uh
if the mutation does in fact disrupt
mitochondrial function there is a good
probability that you will see the
pathology if the mutation does not
disrupt mitochondrial function it is on
unlikely that you will see the pathology
so the prime cause of cancer is damage
to oxidative phosphorilation whether
done by an environmental insult or a
germline risk factor um so you put all
that together I don't know what the
penetrance is I didn't look at a
polycystic kidney disease we'll have to
go back and uh check that out which
means that does everyone who inherits
the dominant mut most dominant mutations
are not 100% penetrant uh in cancer but
like in Huntington's disease it can be
you can have dominants that are 100%
penetrant I'd have to go back and look
and see whether polycystic kidney
disease because that mutation that you
just mentioned is associated with
mitochondrial dysfunction so uh that
phenotype is in some way related to when
I say mitochondrial dysfunction it's
usually an interruption of ability to
get energy through oxygen which is
oxidative
phosphorilation uh I I have to be
cautious in what I say only because I
have not done as much work on polycystic
kidney disease sure as I have done on
many many other types of cancers uh
which I you know I put my I'm I'm I'm
more concerned right now about managing
the majority of major cancers and polyc
kidney disease is kind of like on the
wings right now but but it could be
brought into the into and managed just
as effectively but I but I don't know
sure sure um so one thing that um maybe
arises from this is most people that
have the adpkd mutation and from the
data that I've seen it's not entirely
clear if it's 100 of penetrant or not
but there are some um population VI
genomic studies which suggest that
there's about twice as many people with
the mutation as would have been assumed
in the past when you uh would just be
looking at the symptoms as so so people
who have done ultrasound or um who have
been diagnosed with with cyst so I
suspect it might not be 100% penetrant
but um that in itself would actually be
a major Discovery so um it's I don't
think yeah no and again I I don't want
to speak to that but I you'd have to
have you know people screened in the
population like or for example
polycystic kidney disease runs in the
family uh and if it's a dominant then
you have 50% of The Offspring would
would would be expected to have that yes
and then you'd say if it skips a
generation and uh you find that this was
a carrier they never experi they never
manifested the phenotype but their
offspring now does then that's not 100
then that that's clear evidence that
it's not 100% penetrant really okay so
so if people have the adpkd or any kind
of mutation and is
heterozygous then um can you sort of
explain to us how that impacts the
expression of the affected protein like
do we still make 50% of the correct
version of the protein and 50% incorrect
or how how is it managed and how does it
over the long term then maybe in the
case of of another mutation that you're
more familiar with um impact
mitochondrial metabolism yeah well I I I
don't know I as I said I have to I'd
have to look more at it but generally
what we find for dominant mutations in
in humans is that um uh there's a
suppressor Gene of some sort uh that
prevents the the phenotype from being
seen uh that's why they call Skip
Generations like why what the hell this
person has the mutation uh uh but they
never expressed it why did that person
not express the phenotype and that's
usually some more complicated
explanation it could be environmental it
could be another Gene in the genome
which they call suppressor mutations
which prevent the expression of of a
protein or whatever uh there's there's
many different explanations uh for these
kinds of things but the issue of course
that we're more concerned about today is
um if one does have the polycystic the
dominant form of polycystic kidney
disease uh uh they will have phenotypes
uh what is the probability of that
phenotype morphing into some form of of
cancer and um I think that should be the
more uh acute question and also uh what
can you do to PO potentially reduce the
probability of you getting uh uh
malignancy uh based on on expressing the
the gene is there a way you can is there
a way you can use diet or exercise or
something like this to reduce the
probability of that Gene causing
disregulated cell growth I mean I think
in other words is is there anything we
as a as a a person could do uh to uh uh
help help them reduce risk and and we'd
have to look more into that like you
said these diet therapies um they may be
effective in reducing risk or you know M
or preventing uh tumors from other
organs uh as a consequence of having
that of that dominant mutation so um
again uh I think that's the key that
you'd like to you'd like to look at yeah
yes so so just really short um
mechanistically speaking if there is
something that people can do maybe in
your your case in leani um that if it's
a heterozygous mutation can people sort
of influence the body to make more of
the correct copy of the
uh of from the gene or is it not
possible and is it always 50/50 the
expression um no no I mean I think you
have to look at each as I said I I I
haven't studied polycystic kidney
disease like we used to study
Huntington's disease and and some of the
other dominant like muscle muscular
duan's Muscular distrophy and things
like this um so I would have to go back
and look at that okay uh when I used to
teach
neurogenetics uh I would talk about
these various conditions but I I don't
remember doing a lot of work on on
polycystic kidney disease yeah um so so
you know I'd have to go back and refresh
my my my my studies on this and look
into it but you know the issue here
we're we're concerned and I think people
people should who have that mutation in
their genome they're they're they the
issue that they should be most concerned
about is whether they're just going to
have uh kidney cysts or whether they're
going to have a malignancy in some other
organ besides the kidney yeah and and I
think um they would like to know uh can
can they maintain control uh over the
situation uh and thereby reduce their uh
risk of getting liver or uh a liver
cancer or some a cancer in some other
organ yeah and I I think that might be
the best thing because if you inherit
something there's not anything we can do
about you getting or not getting the
mutation if you have the mutation is
there anything you can do to reduce the
probability that mutation May uh the
symptoms of the mutation could be in
some way reduced and I think yeah we
would like to know whether that's
possible or not yeah so so so a main um
model that people uh use in PKD is the
is the second hit hypothesis and I think
it's also um in cancer in some models
right well you know the second hit
hypothesis is usually involves the
destruction or interference with
mitochondria you you you have to u i
mean that that go goes back uh what's
his name geez I when you get older you
can't remember anybody's name no um
it'll come to me uh the two hit
hypothesis that that's based on the
sematic mutation theory of cancer
there's retino blasto I think there's
some other mutations that that do this
but all I know is you can't get cancer
without with when you have your
mitochondria healthy yeah that's a fact
you want to know every every tumor that
we've seen has a mitochondri so the
second hit must involve um mitochondrial
dysfunction in one form or another you
know yeah it's a chicken or egg question
isn't it so uh when I it's not a chicken
is it not no chicken we rule that out uh
with the nuclear mitochondrial transfer
experiments it's clearly mitochondria
it's not chicken or oh that's not that's
not what what I meant um so so the way I
think about it and correct me if this is
totally uh not correct the way think
about it is if I have one healthy copy
of the PKD genes like the pc1 PC2 and I
have one mutated copy then for a certain
amount of time the kidney might just
work sort of okay with uh those those
versions and then injury happens this
so-called second hit and then one cell
just by chance doesn't have the second
copy of the of the gene so now both are
mutated in some way and now this cell is
is really really damaged and this one
starts proliferating and then taking up
space is that a possibility well I I
think the second hit uh you have a
predisposition and then as you said then
you all of a sudden now uh have the full
manifestation of the problem where where
what was the second hit what what was
this um you know you you you you uh it's
hard to know because yeah the the it's
hard to know because when you have the
disregulated cell growth in in cancer
you produce and this is what I I I think
was the second hit was an was an
environmental uh problem yes um where
the second alil was supposedly damaged
but what's damaging what's the origin of
the damage you know what the origin of
the damage reactive oxygen species that
are produced from the dysfunctional
mitochondria question that I had yeah
yeah they're Ross are reactive oxygen
they're carcinogenic and mutogenic so
the second hit may have come from the uh
uh um mut IC effects of Ross R coming
from this functional mitochondria so so
um you know we can people can go and
they can spend you know the next 100
years investigating this stuff the the
the you know I'm at an age where uh we
want to make we want to resolve the
problem yeah um as fast as we can to
give people an opportunity to live
longer with a higher quality of life
yeah and um we pretty much know how to
do that if if we can if we can uh put
the different pieces of the puzzle
together and we can never be 100% sure
that we can cure anybody I always say
that if you can stay alive with a higher
quality of Lang you're a young guy right
okay God forbid you get cancer you do
metabolic therapy and and and and you
die at 98 years old without ever cancer
ever recurring okay then you were cured
how do we know uh we won't know that
until the until the final Bell is run
right yeah and I want to get into that I
want to get into that I don't want to
get bed down in genetics um I just
wanted to sort of set the stage so that
um because I think it's super relevant
to do the metabolic therapy and people
in the petti world are it's also it's
also super relevant to speak about the
genetics and I think I think the
questions you uh presented are extremely
important and they need to be evaluated
in light of we need to we need to
evaluate the light of the genetics in
light of the environmental and metabolic
aspects so this is why uh those
questions that you've asked are
extremely important for those
individuals that might be very
interested in this opening up a new
Vista for them to start to think more
about second hits and what be could be
responsible and how the primary mutation
uh might in fact uh either be suppressed
or enhanced depending on the situation
so I think it's a very I think these are
extremely important questions uh and I
don't want to it's just for me in my
state right now I wish I I wish I had
another 50 years to live live and maybe
I would go after those things yeah but
you're not going to live forever so you
might as well do what you can with the
time you have left not that I'm going to
be dead tomorrow but but but the thing
of it is those kinds of experiments
would be several PhD students working on
the problem uh for quite a while but
nevertheless they are very important
questions and I'm very happy that you
asked me those because I'm going to have
to start going back and look at it more
myself yeah we'll mark it as unknown for
now yeah so at least we know that in PKD
most of the uh nephrons are actually
like at least for most of Life are
actually still functioning and they're
not proliferating but we have those few
that are proliferating and they making
the cyst and they take up room and that
is sort of the the main issue and I
think that um the so we are seeing some
shr some some shrinkage with metabolic
therapies and with a ketogenic diet and
I think it's it's worthwhile to start um
something similar to your press pulse
protocol which we shouldn't should go
into next um to ultimately if if we
really find the protocol that that works
perfectly maybe get rid of most of the
proliferating cells and then end up with
a much smaller kidney that is much more
efficient and um yeah uh doesn't doesn't
do this this uncontrolled proliferation
anymore so the I don't want to bury the
lead here um the super important
discovery that you made and that you
built upon the warberg effect I think
you do you still call it the the warber
Q
effect yeah um well you know we're still
in the um wishy-washy State here uh I
have some uh very excellent uh
colleagues postdocs and students and
we're in the process of re-evaluating
the names uh the
terminologies uh that we use um you know
U warberg never mentioned that this is
my effect he he he he uh said it was
aerobic fermentation basically which
people recognize as what they We Now
call uh the the warberg effect
um um eim racker from Cornell University
uh labeled that the warberg effect
everybody just jumps on it calls it a
warberg effect and the it's what it is
is aerobic fermentation and what does
that mean that means you're fermenting
in the presence of oxygen that's what
why are you why is the cell fermenting
in the presence of oxygen because the
oxidative phos foration system is ineff
inefficient this is not a mystery I mean
we went through all the major cancers
and showed that every one of them have
some defect in the number structure and
function of the mitochondria which
obviously require a compensatory
fermentation I mean the fact that
there's so many folks out there that
can't understand that or blaming genes
um on this is just is just nuts I again
you have to wonder how me the brains of
members of our species actually uh work
um it's just unbelievable IDE
ideological Dogma I mean it's just
incredible but you know you have to Wade
through all this and you hope that um
you know half the people say oh you know
warberg was completely wrong tumor cells
consume oxygen at the same rate as
normal cells therefore uh they're not
fermenting and we and others have
clearly shown that the oxygen
consumption in tumor cells is not not
linked completely to ATP synthesis
through oxidative phosphorilation and
this is it's like they're uncoupled and
for whatever reason people can't
understand that because you know what
the problem is is so many people working
in the cancer field are molecular
biologists they're not they're
geneticists molecular biologists they're
not biochemists they don't know
physiology they don't know biochemistry
they just look at gene expression
profiles hoping to get some insight into
what's going on never actually asking
can my cells grow in the absence of f a
fuels and the answer is we can't find
any and we have been searching for for
any cancer cell that can survive in
culture in the absence of fermentable
fuels so all cancers as far as we're
concerned are driven by the sugar
glucose and the amino acid glutamine our
major contribution which still is not
understood or accepted or even known
about is that the tumor cells are
fermenting glutamine they're not
respiring glutamine this is an
incredibly important point that people
for whatever reason can't wrap their
heads around there I'm working with
Christo chinopoulos at a Budapest at
semil University the world leader on
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation you have to realize that
the mitochondria not only can produce
energy through oxos but when oxos is
inefficient they can produce energy
through substrate level phosphorilation
which is a nonoxidative form of of
energy production and can happen in the
absence of oxygen so the same organel
that's uh producing majority of energy
can also produce energy with a
non-oxidative source and that's called
fermentation and what is the fuel for
mitochondrial substrate level
fermentation and it's glutamine so most
I would say 90% of the people in the
metabol cancer metabolism field think
that glutamine is respired it's an
anotic uh fuel for the TCA cycle well we
showed no no no no no no it's not that
you're dumping out succinic acid out of
the TCA cycle
you should never dump suic acid out of a
TCA cycle if you're respiring you're
preventing listen listen let me tell you
something when people have heart attacks
okay you're you stop breathing because
your heart's no longer pumping blood
through your right the first thing you
see within a couple of minutes a massive
amount of lactic acid and soyic acid in
the bloodstream where the hell is all
that that's the those are the waste
products of a fermentation metabolism
attempting to keep cells alive in the
absence of oxygen which they can do up
until five or six minutes when the brain
dies all right right but you see a huge
amount of succinic acid and lactic acid
now as soon as you start breathing your
hearts come back and you start breathing
again lactic acid and succinic acid
disappear from the bloodstream because
we're now respiring again the difference
between that scenario and cancer is the
cancer cells are continuing to produce
lactic acid and suic acid even in the
presence of oxygen why are they doing
that because the oxidative
phosphorilation system is in in is
insufficient why is this so complicated
for anybody to understand why do why did
the majority of people of the forget
about the genetics guys the molecular
biology guys but what about the guys
working on cancer metabolism why is it
that they don't understand that yeah and
when you do the I mean it's just
unbelievable so for me and I I say well
you know you get frustrated by another
member of your species not being able to
comprehend clear information
um I you know we have to appreciate how
the other brain brains of others work
but you know the bottom the bottom line
is if you understand what I'm saying it
offers a framework and pathway forward
to start managing cancer effectively and
for whatever reason uh this is resisted
by or and and they they never seem to
attack the science they they always
attack something peripheral to the
science yes yes and and uh I think we
can all speculate as to the the reasons
for that um we've we've been around the
block block for some time um so for for
uh PKD uh patients who are listening to
this that are aware of the fact that
even PKD cells use glucose to ferment um
we we really need to hammer this point
home that um from today we know that
it's not just glucose that these cells
can ferment but it's also the lamine um
maybe you can tell us a little more
about um How You Came Upon This
Discovery in cancer and how you are how
you've changed your recommendations for
cancer patients since
then yeah well I I knew um in my book I
speculated first uh I was the first one
to speculate uh on this process in
chapter eight of my book uh we have some
interesting things because um uh
hokka a gentleman who who knew a lot
about human physiology he did some kinds
of experiments years ago published them
in
1975 where he took animals that could
swim underwater like seals and walruses
and certain other kinds of things like
dolphins and stuff strap them to a board
you can't you can't do this today uh
people get all bent at it bent out of
shape yeah cruel cruel but he but but
what he did was find some incredible
information and that was that suic acid
and lactic acid accumulated in the
bloodstream of these animals now these
were animals that could actually hold
their breath sign it wasn't taking a dog
or a cat in doing this it was doing with
animals that of course they were all
freaked out everything I mean you can
read the actual research but um and then
when the animals started BR them up they
breathe again suic acid and lactic acid
disappeared we have known in cancer for
a long time that cancer cells are
dumping out lactic acid and succinic
acid so I I said where's that suic and
and hokka said it was due to amino acid
fermentation but hok hokka never said
what the what the amino acid was that
was being fermented so I just assume
because they everybody in cancer field
knows that cancer cells suck down a lot
of glutamine and they were all con they
were all convinced that it was respired
so um uh when we when we looked at all
the evidence from hokka and these others
I speculated that this uh glutamine is
being fermented it's not being uh
respired and the end product would be
succinic acid dumped out rather than
staying in the TCA sock this I going
back again so so I contacted uh uh
shopis Christos because he's the world
expert he published all these papers
with with himself and Dr trer at at
Budapest and I said to him I have this
idea that I think uh and Po and Christos
was working purely in Biochemistry he
didn't get into the cancer field uh and
then I brought this to his tension and
now he's in the C and I said you know
the you're purely you're pure
biochemistry colleagues and this is an
academic um exercise there's no hard
feelings there's no animosity there's no
anger right now that he jumps into the
cancer field it's hostile the cancer
field is a very hostile field but he he
told me he said you're absolutely
correct at what you're saying the
problem is you didn't have all the
pathways aligned in the correct way so
his input into this allowed us now to
align the correct Pathways to explain
how a glutamine is being fermented and
the mechanism of what's going on in this
process and we have now in my I science
paper done with Christos and we're
working together on several of he's
publishing papers out of his institution
we're co-authors on a number of these
processes we're better defining how
cancer cells are able to produce energy
through fermentation mechanisms and even
when you think about uh because they'll
forget without energy no cell can
survive and this is what warberg was
saying he says forget about every forget
about everything else it's all about
energy because once you once you know
how the cell is getting energy you can
then begin to think about how to stop it
all the other things gene expression
profiles this and that all secondary
effects to energy because once the
energy goes doesn't make any difference
what mutations they have do make any
difference what they're doing so we said
if cancer cells are fer are are are can
generate enough energy through oxas
where are they getting their energy from
now warberg said it was all coming from
gly olsis using glucose however new
studies say that a lot of cancer cells
and I don't know about polycystic kidney
the P pyruvate kinas
pkm2 is a pyruvate kinas that produces
lactic acid but not compensatory from
ATP so you got to know about that the
cancer cells will use glucose for um
metabolite synthesis for a growth factor
for for the U metabolites to synthesize
lipids proteins and nucleic acids
through the pentos pathways a lot of
things but they may not be producing
that much energy which people now got to
realize whoa so you have a ratio of PKM
M1 and which can produce energy through
uh through substrate level
phosphorilation which is what how you
get substrate as opposed to oxidative
phosphorilation but we don't know the
exact amount of ATP because there could
be a ratio of pkm1 to pkm2 so warberg
calculations and others calculations are
uh questioned uh because we really don't
know depending on the ratio of these P
pyruvate KY isoforms really how much ATP
is going to be coming through the
cytoplasm and what we call substrate
level phosphorilation aerobic
fermentation and then you have a little
bit of oxidated phosphorilation
insufficient to drive the disregulated
growth but there's some from there and
then you have the glutamine uh coming
from a fermentation mechanism so so you
have all these bits and pieces of energy
coming from different parts of the cell
depending upon how damaged or how uh uh
how this how the overall Global energy
situation happens to be but what we have
found unambiguously is that no tumor
cell can grow without the contribution
of fermentable fuels which is glucose
and glutamine and how much that is
depends upon how abil what the ability
of the oxos system is if the oxas system
has a little bit then you don't or or a
little bit more you don't need as much
fermentation but if it has lower you de
fermentation so there's even grades like
uh can be like partially damaged summer
Dam some are not so the cell uh in that
case would the cell be proliferating uh
at half the speed for example if just
50% Mia are are damage yeah well that's
what think and it's not just 50% of
mitochondri it's like each cell in in
the disregulated growth may have a
different slightly different type and
then the of course the other aspect is
what is this the biology of the cell
that's uh involved in this and uh
metastatic cancers uh arise from our
immune cells uh macrofagos and some Lucy
lymphocytes fusing with uh stem cancer
stem cells and you have this hybrid kind
of a cell uh which which possesses
maccrage Char why is that important
because macras can spread around the
body stem cells can't stem cells can
grow like crazy but but they can't
spread they're not equipped genetically
to spread the macras is equipped
genetically to spread so when you have a
fusion hybridization between a cancer
stem cell rapidly growing and an an
immune cell uh and the and the cytoplasm
now becomes corrupted and the
mitochondria become corrupted you have a
cell that's now uh going into its
default state but can spread around your
body so um so you have to realize that
and those cells are powerfully glutamine
driven so we knew right away how to
manage metastatic cancer uh by targeting
the glutamine because most metastatic
cancers are strongly derived from our
immune system cells which are more
glutamine dependent than some other
cells so again you have to know the cell
biology of what's going on with all this
and today we have uh clinical trials uh
that are targeting glutamine and some of
these trials are are doing okay but they
never Target the glucose at the same
time so you never get optimal
uh outcome if you're leaving the the
back door open uh allowing cells to get
some energy through the cytoplasm and
that is exactly where we are in PKD
right now because uh the ketogenic diet
has taken up some steam in the community
which is great and we are seeing uh some
people that are able to reverse and
Shrink their kidney volume uh it might
might even be everybody but of course
it's not it's not a huge kind of thing
that you would see in a tumor remission
like it's uh maybe it's a 10% reduction
maybe it's a 5% reduction and that's
what we see that's what we see a lot
with regular cancers as well right um we
don't get complete resolution uh and in
in some cases we do but many cases we
don't and that's because we're never
targeting the two fuels together and you
transition the the body over to
nutritional ketosis the P the purpose of
nutritional ketosis is to keep all of
the cells in your body that have normal
oxidative phosphorilation healthy and
even more healthy and it also uh
deprives the tumor cell of the fuel
glucose the tumor cells can't burn
ketones unless they have a good
mitochondria most of them don't so they
can't burn fatty acids or Ketone bodies
so the role of ketogenic diets is
basically to turn Elevate ketones for
the health and vitality of your normal
kidney cells and cells and and other
organs uh while allowing the body to uh
lower glucose and transitioning away
from glucose now and I developed uh here
we developed the glucose Ketone index
calculator which the patients to know
people use this in the community yeah
yeah absolutely if you can get to 2.0 or
below you are now primed for glutamine
targeting and now you can you can take
glutamine targeting and and reduce any
any adverse toxicity from from the
glutamine targeting and glutamine
targeting to explain to the people who
have never heard of this right so they
are on a therapeutic ketogenic diet they
have a very low glucose they have high
ketones they're doing everything right
and now we're taking another fuel of
these cells cancer cells or even PKD
cells away with which
interventions yeah so you would use
glutamine targeting now one of the ways
that we have some a paper that we've
just come out with high-grade Goma for
children God our our therapy would save
so many kids the problem is they're not
doing it it's just so such a tragedy
when you see all these poor little kids
dying from high-grade gomas um but we
found endol the parasite medication has
some minor minor effect on on on
reducing glutamine uh metabolism as well
as glucose metabolism um it works better
when you're in a ketogenic state so um
we're working on that but the the most
powerful drug we've seen so far is is C
6D oxy Oxon norleucine
Don uh d n is the an acronym uh which is
really the as far as we're concerned we
haven't seen anything more powerful than
this um and and and uh we can use it
with ketogenic and we published papers
on on showing how Don works with the
ketogenic diet in pre-clinical systems
um but none of it's it's nobody's doing
it um none of the big hospitals are
doing this uh because Don you can't make
money on it's off patent it's a not it's
a it's a they say oh it's too toxic well
if you figure a way to take a
tremendously powerful drug and and
figure out how to remove or reduce its
toxicity it's like having a New Drug but
but they still don't want to use it now
you you want to ask why that why do they
not want to use a drug that could be
really powerful and help so many people
uh whether it's in Germany the United
States England Japan they don't use the
damn drug and the drug is so powerful
and if you use it according to press
pulse Concepts you'll get really good
results for the majority of people our
prediction is this um but nobody's doing
this anywhere nobody is targeting
glucose and glutamine simultaneously
while placing the patient in nutritional
ketosis maybe PKD is even a field that
is less thought over and maybe it's
maybe it could even in the future be a
an interesting candidate to maybe get
more people sort of uh doing the proof
of concept because right now even the
the clinical trials for the ketogenic
diet seem to be underway in a pretty
good uh stage and the first one with
three months runtime has already already
been concluded um so I think we now have
close to maybe a thousand people online
that are actively doing uh the ketogenic
diet for PKD and they have never heard
of glutamine inhibition so if we maybe
could give them sort of an overview of
what they can do on their own and what
they can do with a doctor yeah well I
think you know as we said with glutamine
targeting you really you really have to
be very very careful um because
glutamine is necessary for our gut
glutamine is necessary for the function
of our immune cells uh glutamine is
necessary for the Ura cycle um if you do
not know how to use this tool it you can
harm patients so you have to have a
knowledgeable person knowing that's why
we develop the pulsing of glutamine
rather than pressing you can press
glucose down because it's not essential
because GL ketones can replace glucose
but you need the glutamine so if you're
too aggressive in doing this you could
actually damage the immune or your gut
or make or make
a a situation not as good as it could be
so um again and this is where we are now
to day as you and I are speaking we're
at the position of of dosage timing and
scheduling this is The Cutting Edge of
where we are right now what is the doses
timing and scheduling of the glutamine
targeting to go along with the
nutritional ketosis so and we're trying
to figure out what drugs and what
combinations timing and dosage and and
as as as uh people in the field and I've
said it over again over and over again
in many of these podcasts we don't
consider the field of academic medicine
not consider this as sexy science yeah
this is not the kind of really wow oo
you know we're trying to figure out the
best dosage timing and scheduling to uh
allow allow the person to live a higher
quality of life and a much longer
survival all right and well this doesn't
seem like it's really uh but I'll tell
you when you don't have the right dosage
timing and scheduling you're not going
to get the optimal effect and how do we
do that well we have to do we have to
work on preclinical systems and we share
that with the oncology Community with
people and then the people are at least
aware and we have to monitor their
overall blood work and Physiology as we
start to change dosage timing and
scheduling um and see how the patients
are responding how do you feel today uh
let's look at your your growth let's
look at a lot of these parameters and
then what worked for this person may not
be optimal for another person yes so we
have to use each person has their own
control because everybody is different
they different body weight different
agenders and all these kinds of things
and we're dealing with a physiological a
dynamic physiological system that has to
be worked on individually now will there
come some general at time in the future
where we can make some general
assumptions on how people will will
respond maybe maybe not but this is The
Cutting Edge what I just said right now
is The Cutting Edge and it will become
the future of managing cancer everywhere
on the planet once people understand
what's going on yeah so so for people
who are Maybe at a later stage in their
disease and uh as in cancer um don't
have too much time to to to to to wait
um what so there's two different
approaches right um you could either
sort of go it on your own you could
maybe do some Hyperbaric O oxygen
therapy to maybe increase your chances
of of of uh decreasing some of the cyst
growth and maybe you could combine it um
and maybe you can speak to this with uh
the other uh more natural supplements
that that you've mentioned like egcg or
even with with prescription stuff like
chlorine or or mendol and um
alternatively they could find a doctor
that would usually do this with cancer
patients and see if if they are willing
to also um take somebody on board with
PKD what do you think about these two uh
those are good good good points um you
know um chloroquin U why chloroquin is
important it it might stop fosy there's
a lot of things in it chloroquin just
neutralizes acidity in the lome um and
you know and bendol you know the
parasite medication Fen bendol I I again
we we have to I I I have to pre I have
to test preclinically a lot of this
stuff yeah um because I because you're
you have what we call we have a lot of
moving targets here we have a lot of
variables uh you know which one is
working best with another we're always
looking for Synergy uh we want Synergy
uh we don't want antagonism we don't
want to use something that antagonizes
the
benefit of something else we want
Synergy okay and those experiments are
laborious and timec consuming and uh
when we run these things here at Boston
College you know our vivarium we we we
have to do the experiments with control
groups uh and then we have to repeat it
and after we get the results we have to
repeat it again and and we need to
repeat it and repeat it and repeat it to
be 100% sure what the hell we got and we
want to make sure the facts and the
outcomes are reproducible and then once
we have that then we can tweak this and
that again on the background of what we
know now people people should know that
this is not U it's costly to do these
experiments it's time consuming to do
these experiments yeah but when we get
the right time when we get the right
information then we can speak more uh uh
uh knowledgeable have more knowledge
about the supplements that should be
used when they should be used uh
otherwise we're just throwing stuff at
the wall and hoping something
uh we want we want to know which which
uh supplements are synergistic and why
we need to use them when we use them uh
and without that information we're just
you know we're just ex just like um I
don't know what do you want to do hope
for the best or you know just hope you
hit the target by chance you know it
it's it's you got to have more you got
to have more knowledge about what you're
doing so we know that simultaneous
targeting of glucose and glutamine while
the body is in nutrition ketosis is
likely to provide the the greatest level
of of of success right now but as again
uh what those glutamine targeting drugs
uh how they work together uh and when we
should use them along with hyperbaric
oxygen uh again we always tell people if
you're going to do hyperbaric oxygen
make sure you have a low gki when you go
into the chamber and that's also depend
on the day the the time of the day
because everybody's body is different so
we're optimizing the variables um that
will eventually be brought into a
comprehensive uh treatment protocol and
as I said we've we've we've written a
very very comprehensive treatment
protocol for gleo blastoma brain tumor
which is now submitted for publication
uh which over we have over 40 m uh
Physicians and scientists on this on
this article um which we brought we
brought yeah we brought in a lot of
discussion from a broad range of
Physicians and we put a very
comprehensive treatment protocol
together and then that now allows
physicians in the clinics to say okay I
have a treatment I have a plan here
let's follow the plan and as we begin to
implement the plan we'll get feedback
from those who are using the protocol
telling us how we can optimize the
different parts of this now this this
treatment is very strikingly different
from the way we're we're developing new
drugs for cancer and these kinds of
things currently where we take a
singular drug and we have double blind
crossover we cannot do we have to
metabolic therapy the whole system of of
clinical trial analysis has to be re
re-evaluated because metabolic therapy
cannot be forced into a a trial that's
been used for singular drugs so because
we're using as you just said we're using
multiple drugs and we're using and we're
using diet and multiple drugs together
uh all all to improve the outcome of an
individual's uh on the on the planet so
we're not rounding up people and
throwing into these trials and and you
have to know how to use the diet and the
diet is not I hate to even use the term
diet we use we use these things to
facilitate the action of the drugs um
you know what's what what what diet
might work for this guy could be totally
different than the diet that works for
the other guy so when you say we're
doing trials on ketogenic diets uh we we
look at each individual are they are
they vegetarians are they pescatarians
what the hell are not everybody's the
same so we have to build metabolic
therapy around each individual's
physiology
so that they all can get into the gki of
2.0 below and they may one guy may use a
diff totally different diet than the
other guy so uh we don't want to throw
all these people because some people say
I can't do this it's too and everybody
criticize oh it's too hard to do that
you know we do it little kids all the
time with epilepsy thousands and
thousands of little kids are on these
metabolic therapies and it's and the
parents adjust it to what the Kid Likes
so uh again when I say when you're
saying well we're doing clinical trials
on polycystic kidney disease with
ketogenic diets well I hope the hell you
the guys doing those things know what
they're doing um because what happens is
you don't get the results I don't think
they're doing
gki they they're doing uh blood ketones
Jesus Christ I mean I I sit and listen
to these guys and I and they do this
stuff and they oh it didn't work as well
as well for Christ's sake it didn't have
the right people doing the damn thing
yeah you well I did see that that they
they definitely did measure blood
ketones and they did have a uh that did
have an effect so it's not like it
didn't work but maybe in PKD it's easier
to because it's uh not not growing so
fast yeah but the the effects could be
dramatically better if you know how to
do what you're doing and and know and
know this so you always gives us some
effect no more studies are needed you
know we we would work we would work up
each person as an individual work them
up as an individual and then we would
cat we would know what these guys should
have and how what their diet what the
drugs so uh and it might differ from one
person to the next so is it realistic
for somebody uh with with PKD to to find
a doctor or somebody that that's working
with your protocol um that's usually
doing it for cancer yeah good luck with
that you're not gonna get anybody you go
and ask these guys because they're
overrun with with cancer patients oh
they're not overrun they just that's
part of it for sure but the other thing
is they have no clue they have no
knowledge about what I just said they
they have no clue about the biology of
the disorder they're working with no but
even the few that are doing it your way
that that's what I'm saying nobody's
doing it most if if we're doing some
some of these kinds of things we're in
experimental stages I mean we have
certain clinics in the country but again
they throw supplements at the problem
and I said what does this supplement do
we're still not there yet uh we have the
framework we have the knowledge but we
the practical application is where we
are and and and we need to get now yes
there are some folks that do so
unbelievably well and then there are
those who don't um why are the guys why
this guy did so well and the other guy
didn't and then you find out there are
tremendous differences in the physiology
of that guy versus the other guy yeah so
we need to work out a lot of the the the
the the nuances of of this thing and
because everybody I can tell you one
thing Felix everybody wants this they
want this more than anything that
they're that the system offers but the
the application has not yet been
perfected where we can bring some guy
and look at him and within three hours
tell him exactly what path he should be
taking yeah uh we need we're in the
experimental uh thing and you'd be
surprised how many people would like to
jump into this uh and use themselves as
kind of guinea pigs uh to uh to
determine their outcome and those guys
that do really really well start telling
everybody else how well they're doing
yeah um but not everybody does that and
I have to be honest with you you know
some of our people that I know that I'm
working with like Pablo Kelly with brain
cancer I mean he's not cured but he's
alive 10 years uh he would have been
dead like in 15 months but he's not cure
the damn tumor is still growing and with
your polycystic population you might
find these people are just just living
with it it's it's not getting worse you
know and they're living far longer and
they're not as
debilitated by the the symptoms yeah and
even now we're we're we're seeing a lot
of people who who are actually reversing
and um that that that's even what the P
podcast is called right reversing PKD
I'm I'm one of them but um of course it
would be super interesting to even try
like some very low uh low efficiency but
like highly available glutamine
inhibition things like hbot egcg stuff
like that well I I don't think they're
gonna hurt um yeah they could have some
minor effect I would say mbz might be
more powerful and bendol yeah and bendol
yeah and Fen maybe Fen bendol these are
wormers um and you would pulse them like
in the hbot if you were yes yes yes and
people always say you know why why are
you using this parasite medication well
what the hell man uh the parasites and
the cancer cells use metabolic substrate
level phosphorilation to get energy they
ferment they ferment right you know you
know and I didn't know that well because
you don't spend as much time doing the
as I do for Christ sake yes I live
and die this St I'm on this stuff
constantly and after a while you say how
you people don't know that I didn't know
I never read the article I oh jeez well
you got to read the articles and you got
to say why did these parasite
medications work so well against cancer
because the tumor and the and the
parasite are using mitochondrial
substrate level phosphorilation to get
so the so so the endol works against the
glucose fermentation but also against
the glutamine fermentation is yes but
it's not the big it's not a big hammer
it's like a it's like a small Hammer a
couple percent like 10% or it yeah yeah
and but it you know Synergy it happens
like if you do the Endz all by itself
you might get a little effect you do the
keto by itself you get a little you put
the two together and you get a
synergistic effect yeah and now we're
learning that there may be other other
really good drugs that have been you
know dumped dumped out because they
didn't work but we're finding we're
taking those out of the pales and
putting them back into this nutritional
Paradigm and they seem to whoa they take
on a new power of their own so uh this
is uh well we got diastat this is a a
very interesting drug um you we you can
see it in the paper that we published in
BIO archives right theat was for kidney
um P pancreatic cancer it's also
blocking a pathway in the substrate
level phosphorilation but it didn't work
uh so here's the situation uh it was
used in humans with kidney can
pancreatic cancer and it was too toxic
so right the results were not were not
good and uh but it we looked at it we
said you know this could be good so then
we gave it to the mice with uh brain
cancer uh just by itself with the Chow
no did didn't work at all um just like
we found in the human so The Mouse and
the human when you're using the drug by
itself didn't work but then when we put
it together with the ketogenic diet man
alive damn thing worked so much better
and I don't know if the I don't know if
the drug company making deat knows this
or could care about it but we Lo we
looked at it we said holy crap so this
one's actually
approved because Dawn isn't right can
doctors get it uh no that's the problem
uh don why that drug that drug should be
on everybody that should be over-the
counter stuff but it should be I know I
don't want to say over the counter it
should be prescribed by somebody who
knows how to use it by yeah isain yes a
trained in in in pulsing Dawn and
knowing when the patient is in a certain
state that the doctor would order that
but he's also depending on us to give
him the information to know what to do
so um and Don is real powerful um uh and
when you use it with mbz and Don I mean
you get really good results and I think
deat could be brought into this and I
think there's going to be a whole bunch
of these drugs uh that will take on New
Life of their own uh once they're put
into the metabolic therapy and with the
correct dosage and timing we may be able
to achieve tremendous success not only
on cancer patients but polycystic kidney
disease patients as well it's just that
no one else is doing this we're the only
guys on the planet of doing this stuff
yeah I know I know that's why I wanted
to talk to you I mean uh the glutamine
nobody knows this and uh you're you're
spreading the world if you no if you go
to any oncology uh uh Center and you say
cancer needs glue oh of course cancer
needs glue everybody knows canc oh yeah
I'm saying in PKD but yeah of course uh
I always bring the two together because
they so simar but they but but they're
going to say did you know glutamine is
fermented aha no I didn't know that okay
now you should know that okay so that's
the big thing and yeah so I you know I
do all these things and people are
always asking me all these questions and
what should I do what you know uh and
the field is just lost it's just
stumbling around uh still locked into
this whole genetic thing cancer is a
genetic disease and and doing all this
crazy stuff to harming people um and it
it should stop these guys got to know
what's going on and eventually once they
start learning they're all going to say
oh yeah this really works good you know
and I'm saying well yeah they're going
to say it was obvious all the
time it was obvious that was obvious so
obious how come nobody's doing it yeah
exactly that's what they're gonna
say right yeah so amazing no your
systems are locked into a rigid rigidity
and I can say that in Germany I was well
man those guys are locked in but so are
the British and so the Americans I mean
there's almost zero flexibility the
French you know they're all the same
they're locked in the system has got
them locked in and there's no
flexibility allowed you must do it this
way and no other
way but for the but for the people doing
the the trials on ketogenic diet for PKD
you would probably suggest to them to to
add a glutamine inhibition strategy to
it well I would say I would say do that
only after you get yourself into a low
gki 2.0 below don't do it before that
and do it with any diet that you can do
whether it's water only fasting
carnivore diet vegan I don't care you
get yourself into a low gki and then you
can entertain the possibility of using
glutamine targeting drugs and uh right
now you mentioned a couple chloroquin
and EG egcg it's a you know it's just so
weak um compared to these other yeah you
should see how power compared to Don
it's not even I mean it's you I mean you
want drugs that are really going to work
but you want to use them you don't need
much that's the other thing when you
when you know what to do the amount of
drug glutamine targeting drug you need
is so much less so the toxicity issue
becomes almost a non-issue yeah was it
like a a couple hundred milligrams or
yeah maybe even less uh but once you're
in ketosis man these drugs take on uh
there's so much more powerful and so
much less toxic I mean I
mean can you believe it so um yeah so
yeah you you know your your group
polycystic kidney disease uh could be a
group
uh to test all this in a real effective
way and because you're going to see
outcomes that are pretty obvious pretty
quick yeah and um and if that's the case
you know you guys might be the spearhead
that that ships the whole cancer field
over the way the way they should be who
knows it's it's definitely not as fought
over yeah yeah right so uh you have a
good possibility and again I I wish you
the best in in doing this um at least
putting the knowledge out and seeing
what happens and maybe you guys will
will come up with the uh the best dosage
timing and scheduling of this whole
thing who knows who knows yeah we'll
we'll certainly uh keep on investigating
it and I'll definitely uh try some of
the lower uh easier to get stuff on on
myself uh whenever I reach the the
certain threshold of two or
below which is not as easy I'm uh trying
out these continuous Ketone monitors and
glucose monitors right now and it's not
that easy to get to a gki that law so
well listen you have to appreciate the
fact that our Paleolithic ancestors that
existed on the uh on the planet far
longer than our Neolithic period from
10,000 years ago we were we were a
species for several hundred thousand
years and all of us were in ketosis at
that time because there weren't any High
highly processed carbohydrate Foods
anywhere to be found so um uh we were
always we were designed as a species to
be a nutritional ketosis we are
incredible species that can live without
food for long periods of time and remain
active and the other thing that can
lower glutamine is act is exercise so uh
we know that for a fact because it
drives it into the muscle yeah uh kahill
George kahill down here is passed away
head of the jlin diabetes center
published a nice paper several years ago
oh probably 30 or 40 years ago showing
that exercise could lower systemic
glutamine so if you can get into
nutritional ketosis with a good degree
of exercise and even a very minor
glutamine targeting you might be able to
do a really good job at restricting
glutamine that way so again it's it's
moving a lot of a lot of exercise uh
whether you run or walk or lift weights
or do any combination of these bicycling
whatever yeah uh you're going to have
the opportunity to lower uh glutamine
levels and uh also you become less
hungry uh when you're doing exercise uh
it's interesting um if you're sitting in
front of a computer all day long and
some guy's walking by with a Pizza you
know all of a sudden you feel like you
want to eat some of the pizza or a donut
or a pastry of some some sort but if
you're out riding your bike or
running your your hunger doesn't doesn't
come as much you can go fasting for you
can fast for a lot a lot longer when you
have exercise and this all goes back to
our Paleolithic ancestry those guys were
moving all the time they're going to
starve to death that they didn't you
know how hard it is to track down and
kill a a mammoth or a deer I mean you
have to spend a lot of time stabbing
this thing chopping it up I mean you're
using a lot of uh a lot of exercise
doing this so Fise carbohydrates by
definition you know you you gotta love
the you know I don't know if they had
polycystic kidney disease back then uh
but they were they had other health
issues that they that we have that they
didn't have but um we you know we just
have to know where we came from our our
our Evolution and then try to bring it
together together today in our new
knowledge and technology so uh this is
where we this is where we stand right
amazing yeah so uh I hope that uh the
super news on uh the extra fermentation
metabolism with glutamine uh will make
it into the PKD field as you're sounding
the bell in the cancer field and now
we've bringing it over which is amazing
so thank you so much for that one last
idea that I had was um maybe want to
give us like a the 60-second version of
what causes cancer and how to cure it so
we can sort of make a short video on
that well as I said we know ex I know
exactly what causes cancer but I don't
want to say what can cure it all I can
say is how to manage it right no as I
said uh whatever damages uh chronically
damaged damages oxidative
phosphorilation in a in the mitochondr
of a particular cell in a particular
organ can lead to uh disregulated cell
growth with compensatory fermentation
whether that's exposure to radiation
whether it's due to obesity which is now
replacing smoking leading to systemic
inflammation uh type two diabetes
hypertension all these kinds of things
um you know you can have Virus Infection
hyptis hepatitis virus papiloma viruses
all of these things damage oxidative
phosphorilation uh you know germline
like you mentioned polycystic kidney
disease uh as secondary U risk factors
for cancer I mean aging all of these
things will chronically damage
mitochondrial function potentially
leading to disregulated growth with this
compensatory fermentation so we pretty
much know now how you prevent cancer
well if you keep your mitochondria
healthy it's very very very hard to get
cancer and that's why cancer was almost
unheard of in our Paleolithic ancestors
or in the OR members of our species that
live according to ancestral ways cancer
is extremely rare extremely rare in
chimpanzees uh they're living according
to their whether in the zoo or in the
wild they they rarely have ever found to
have cancer so uh we are the ones our
species has deviated so remarkably from
how we evolved putting us at risk for
all of these things so chronic damage to
oxida phosphorilation is the origin of
cancer and um preventing that would keep
your mitochondria healthy so it's hard
to get cancer if your mitochondria
remain healthy the management of cancer
as I've already said you have to then
Target the fermentable fuels and you try
to do that while while enhancing the
health of the rest of the body you're
going to need the normal cells of the
body to work with any kind of drug or
therapy to kill off these tumor cells we
can't we can't um work work successfully
if we're poisoning and radiating and and
mutilating people with the attempt to
help make them healthy this is not
working um the promise of the genome
that we were supposed to use Precision
medicine and all this kind of stuff
because we put the the the field of
cancer put billions and billions of
dollars into these targeted Therapies
immunotherapies imuno ology based on the
wrong Theory cancer is a mitochondrial
metabolic disorder not a genetic
disorder so if you're constantly
developing drugs based on an incorrect
Theory the outcome will never be optimal
for the majority of people receiving
those so once the theory changes the
ideology has to change this is a
mitochondrial metabolic disorder and
once you know that then the
opportunities for prevention and
management become completely different
or very much different doesn't mean we
have to throw out all of the tools that
we've developed for and part of the
standards of care we just have to
re-evaluate how we use them and when we
use them so uh this is will be an
emerging field of knowing how to use the
tools that we already have with the new
Concepts that we're bringing in and this
will ultimately move the population from
a fear stricken CA of cancer to
realizing that this is something yeah
it's going to be an inconvenience you
might have to stop eating this you have
to do more of that but at least you can
bring yourself back to some some
semblance of Health whether you get a
cure or not I have no clue uh but uh at
least you're going to be living on the
planet a longer period of time with a
higher quality of life and this is what
we're beginning to see and we should be
focusing on restricting cancerous fuels
glucose and glutamine instead of
poisoning ourselves yeah I think so um
but again uh we're going to have to work
to bring that knowledge to the people
and they're going to have to work to
know that themselves scientific literacy
now becomes essential uh you cannot be a
pawn in this you can't be HED into like
a bunch of sheep into these clinical
trials that are not going to Target
glucose and glutamine that's the first
thing every cancer patient should ask
their their care caregiver how is your
treatment going to restrict glucose and
glutamine availability while enhancing
the health and vitality of the rest of
my body and if you get a person that
looks like a deer in the headlight you
might want to go somewhere else so uh
this has got the oncologists need to
know about this and they need to work
with the patients to make sure they're
they're they're doing all this the right
way for the be best outcome of the
patient yeah let's hope we get there and
get there soon and then let's get these
oncologists uh teach some of the
nephrologists in PKD and then we can all
uh learn a great deal I hope yeah I hope
so yeah and all the papers that are on
Open Access you can just look my name up
and say Publications and people can read
them all of what I've spoken about is
published um we're working on more
things and um yeah so thank you and I
hope your your your group can benefit
I'm excited to see what happens with the
polycystic kidney group uh be very
interesting to see the outcome of what
of if they start implementing these
kinds of things you guys might be the
ones who knows yeah you I very excited
for it too um last thing let people know
where uh they can support you well um we
get our all of all of the funding that
we get right now comes from private
foundations and
philanthropy um as I said there are
folks that are really excited about what
we're doing and they support us uh and
they know they they don't care whether
they make money they want to know that
for humanitarian purposes they want to
be part of the movement and uh uh Travis
christopherson's foundation for cancer
metabolic therapy supports our work we
have some small foundations that support
us and if people go to my Boston College
web page there's a donation link there
they can donate to our research directly
through the university through Boston
College it's a Jesuit university here in
in uh in in in Boston um so and
different from Boston University we are
not Boston University we're Boston
College and if you look on the you'll
see the two institutions are quite are
quite different so um but any event yes
so thank you if if those uh I send kits
of information out to people uh which
gives them some overview of what's going
on but I think once our big treatment
protocol is accepted we will share that
with the world and and let people uh
everywhere use this to improve uh
overall uh outcome is there a time frame
for that oh God I wish I could tell you
uh but uh it's being reviewed and it's a
big very extensive it's it's a very
extensive treatment
protocol um which which we've considered
all kinds of flexibility embodied in the
protocol itself so uh so reviewers must
look at all the supplementary tables and
other things so it's going to take some
time but once it's published uh and we
will let the world know that the P that
the uh the the the treatment of cancer
uh according to it's for gleo blastoma
but but it's can be used for almost
every cancer because they all the RO
fermentors um so it will work for the
majority and probably even cystic
polycystic fibrosis um polycystic kidney
disease I'm sorry but but but it it'll
work it'll work for the majority of
things so uh we're excited to hopefully
get that out and then uh people will
lean me on me and what I'll do is just
send it out and let everybody try it and
see what how it's going to work and then
we'll all get excited hopefully to see
the outcome we will got a lot of people
trying it I'm sure oh yeah you can even
if you don't have cancer you can try it
just to stay healthy
yeah well you don't want to elimate
glutamine too much in that case yeah no
no you don't have to eliminate glutamine
too much um but uh and we're working on
that we're working on it all right now
so it's a work in proog FR let's put it
that way amazing okay so uh I thank you
so much for your time we've uh already
gone a little bit over so uh thanks for
staying with us and um yeah all the best
over to Boston College thank you so much
nice speaking with you bye now bye-bye
all right everyone that was my interview
with Professor SE freed I hope you found
it very insightful I think it was
amazingly interesting and I will do
another episode sort of recapping and
doing a summary of everything that I
thought was important if you are looking
for a practical way to implement these
strategies that we touched upon in this
interview then you will love the more
detailed explanation that I have in my
book reversing polycystic kidney disease
you can get it on all the platforms it's
now also out in audiobook format so
refer to the book if you want more
details on PKD and glutamine metabolism
and what we can do to actually limit CIS
growth using the glutamine pathway it is
not that simple not a simple as ketosis
but it can be done if youve already read
the book then please leave me a review
on Amazon and wherever you buy the book
that is very important to help other
people find it if you haven't read the
book but you're listening to this show
on YouTube or on another podcast
platform then please give us a thumbs up
a five star writing whatever you can do
to make this show reach more people who
have PKD and who really really need this
kind of information I will see you in
the next episode until then Happy
healing